CONTENTS: lynx netatalk nn_nntp procmail       
lynx:     Lynx 2.8.1
lynx:
lynx:     Lynx is a distributed hypertext browser with full World Wide Web
lynx:     capabilities.  Lynx can be used to access information on the World 
lynx:     Wide Web, or to build information systems intended primarily for local
lynx:     access.  For example, Lynx has been used to build several Campus Wide
lynx:     Information Systems (CWIS).  
lynx:
lynx:     Lynx's authors include Lou Montulli, Garrett Blythe, Craig Lavender,
lynx:     Michael Grobe, and Charles Rezac.
lynx:
netatalk: netatalk-1.4b2+asun2.1.3
netatalk:
netatalk: Netatalk is an Appletalk file and print server for Linux.  Using 
netatalk: Netatalk, Macintosh computers on your local network can mount Linux 
netatalk: volumes as if they were standard Appletalk network drives, and can
netatalk: print to the Linux box's printer as if it were a network printer
netatalk: supporting PostScript.
netatalk:
netatalk: Netatalk is brought to you by our friends at The Research Systems
netatalk: Unix Group, The University of Michigan.  <netatalk@umich.edu>
netatalk:
nn_nntp:  nn-6.5.0.b3 compiled to use NNTP.
nn_nntp:
nn_nntp:  nn is an easy to use menu driven newsreader by Kim F. Storm.  
nn_nntp:  
nn_nntp:  nn stands for "No News is good news", and the nn newsreader is
nn_nntp:  designed to let you minimize the amount of time you spend reading news
nn_nntp:  (or, more realistically, to let you to read even more newsgroups :-).
nn_nntp:  This version of nn reads news from a news server via NNTP, and can
nn_nntp:  make use of your NNTP server's NOV database.
nn_nntp:
nn_nntp:
procmail: The procmail mail processing program. (v3.13 1999/03/31)
procmail:
procmail: Can be used to create mail-servers, mailing lists, sort your incoming
procmail: mail into separate folders/files (real convenient when subscribing to
procmail: one or more mailing lists or for prioritising your mail), preprocess
procmail: your mail, start any programs upon mail arrival (e.g. to generate
procmail: different chimes on your workstation for different types of mail) or
procmail: selectively forward certain incoming mail automatically to someone.
procmail:
procmail: The author of procmail is Stephen R. van den Berg.
procmail:
