  The Linux Intranet HOWTO
  Pramod Karnad, karnadp@mozart.inet.co.th
  v1.1, 14 March 1996

  This document describes how to convert your Linux machine into a HTTP
  server and connect it to a Netware LAN using the Netware Client under
  Windows

  1.  Introduction

  This document assumes that you already know how to install TCP/IP on
  your Linux server and connect it physicaly to your LAN using an
  Ethernet network card. This also assumes you have some basic knowledge
  of Netware. The configuration of the Netware server has been shown
  using version 3.1x as the basis. You can also use INETCFG to achieve
  the same result. On the client side the discussion is with respect to
  Windows 3.1x, Windows for Workgroups and Win95.

  In all the examples I am assuming that the Linux server has an IP
  address of 200.0.0.1 and therefore I am assigning the address of
  200.0.0.2 to the Netware server and 200.0.0.3 to the workstation. You
  may choose suitable addresses depending on your configuration.

  1.1.  What is required

  You will need the following software before attempting the
  installation.

    the HTTP server software which can be downloaded from OneStep NCSA
     HTTPd Downloader page.

    The Novell Netware Client available from Netwire (The TCP/IP files
     can be found in the Lan Workplace update LW42T3.exe).

    WWW Browsers like Netscape Navigator or NCSA Mosaic

  2.  Install the HTTP server

  When you download the server you have two options: To get the source
  and compile it yourself, or get the precompiled binaries. The
  precompiled binaries for Linux (ELF) version are available at NCSA but
  not the older versions.

  2.1.  Preparation before downloading

  The server at NCSA will guide you through the steps for configuration
  options and prepare the various files for you. But before you attempt
  to download HTTPd be prepared with answers to the following questions

  2.1.1.  The Operating System

  First, you much choose whether to download the source or a pre-
  compiled version of the software. If your particular system doesn't
  appear in the menu, then you will have to get the default source, and
  compile it yourself.

  To check the version of your Linux go to the command prompt on your
  Linux machine and type

         linux:~$  uname -a

  which will respond with a line which looks similar to this

          linux:~$  uname -a
          Linux linux 1.0.9 #4 Tue Sep 13 04:05:51 CDT 1994 i586
          linux:~$

  The version of Linux is 1.0.9. (Note: The current versions are ELF and
  should look like linux 1.2.13 ELF)

  The remaining parameters can be specified before downloading or
  configured later by modifying the file srm.conf in the
  /usr/local/etc/httpd/conf directory. The names of the actual
  directives that appear in the file httpd.conf are shown in brackets.
  The only exception is the directive DocumentRoot which appears in the
  file srm.conf

  2.1.2.  Process type (ServerType)

  This specifies how your machine will run your HTTPd server. The
  preferred method is 'standalone'. This makes the HTTP daemon to be
  running constantly. If you choose to load HTTPd under 'inetd', the
  server binary will be reloaded into memory for every request, which
  may slow your server down.

  2.1.3.  Binding Port (Port)

  This specifies which port of your machine that the HTTPd daemon will
  bind to and listen for HTTP requests. If you can login as 'root', use
  the default setting of 80.  Otherwise choose a setting between 1025
  and 65535.

  2.1.4.  Server user identity (User)

  This is the user id the server will change to when answering requests
  and acting on files.This question needs to be answered only if you are
  running the server as 'standalone'.  If you are someone without root
  permissions, just use your own login name. If you are system
  administrator, you might want to create a special user so you can
  control file permissions.

  2.1.5.  Server group identity (Group)

  This is the group id the server will change to when answering requests
  and acting on files. This is similar to Server User identity and is
  applicable only if you are running the server as standalone.

  If you do not have root permissions, just use the name of your primary
  group. You can find out your group by typing groups at the Linux
  command prompt.

  2.1.6.  Server administrator email address (ServerAdmin)

  This is the email address that the user should send an email message
  to when reporting a problem with the server. You can put your personal
  e-mail address.

  2.1.7.  Location of server directory (ServerRoot)

  This is where the server resides on your system. If you have root
  permissions leave it in its recommended location /usr/local/etc/httpd.
  If you cannot login as root, choose a subdirectory in your home path.
  You can find out the path of your home directory with the pwd command.

  2.1.8.  Location of HTML files (DocumentRoot)

  This is where the HTML files to be served are located. The default
  location is /usr/local/etc/httpd/htdocs.  You could however set it to
  be the home directory of the special user you chose in Server user
  identity, or a subdirectory in your home directory if you can't login
  as root.

  When in doubt, use the default settings. Now that you have answers to
  the above questions you can Download NCSA HTTPd.  You should read the
  HTTPd Documentation before you attempt installation. If you are
  planning to compile the code then you need to modify the makefiles in
  each of the three directories support, src, cgi-src. If your version
  of Linux is already supporte d then you just have to type make linux
  at the top level directory (i.e. /usr/local/etc/httpd)

  2.2.  Compiling HTTPd

  Compiling is simple, just type make linux at the prompt in the server
  root directory.  Note: Users of pre-ELF Linux have to uncomment
  #define NO_PASS in file portability.h and set DBM_LIBS= -ldbm in the
  Makefile before compiling HTTPd.

  3.  Testing HTTPd

  After you have installed HTTPd, login as root and start it by typing
  httpd & . (assuming you have installed as standalone) You should now
  be able to see it in the list generated by ps. The simplest way to
  test HTTPd is by Telnet. At the Linux command prompt type

          linux:~$  telnet 200.0.0.1 80

  where 80 is the default port for HTTP. If you have configured 'Port'
  as something different then type that number instead. You should get a
  response which looks like this

          Trying 200.0.0.1...
          Connected to linux.ppg_corp.
          Escape character is '^]'.

  Now if you type in any character and press Enter you should get a
  response similar to the one shown below.

     HTTP/1.0 400 Bad Request
     Date: Wed, 10 Jan 1996 10:24:37 GMT
     Server: NCSA/1.5
     Content-type: text/html

     <HEAD><TITLE>400 Bad Request < /TITLE> < /HEAD>
     <BODY><H1>400 Bad Request < /H1>
     Your client sent a query that this server could
     not understand.<P>
     Reason: Invalid or unsupported method.<P>
     < /BODY>

  Now we are ready to connect to this server using another PC and a WWW
  Browser.

  4.  Connecting on a Netware LAN with Windows

  In order to setup the Netware server you should have Supervisor
  permissions or atleast Console operator permissions. If these cannot
  be got, try asking your Network Administrator to help you with the
  setup.

  In the following examples I am assuming that the Linux server has an
  IP address of 200.0.0.1 and therefore I am assigning the address of
  200.0.0.2 to the Netware server and 200.0.0.3 to the workstation. You
  may choose suitable addresses depending on your configuration.

  4.1.  Setup the Netware server

  At the Server enable the Ethernet_II frame type on the LAN by typing
  these commands or include them in the AUTOEXEC.ncf file.

          load NE2000 frame=Ethernet_II name=IPNET
          load TCPIP
          bind IP to IPNET addr=200.0.0.2 mask=FF.FF.FF.0

  You might have to specify the slot or board number while loading the
  NE2000 driver depending on your machine configuration. (eg: load
  NE2000 slot=3 frame=.....)

  4.2.  Setup the Netware Client

  On the PC you have three choices Win3.1,WFWG or Win95. The
  installation procedure differs between Win95 and the older windows if
  you are using the 32bit client from Microsoft or Novell. If you are
  going to use the 16bit client, the procedure is the you can refer to
  the Windows 3.x installation instructions. For installing the 32bit
  client for Win95 skip to ``Windows 95 installation''.

  4.2.1.  Windows 3.x

  If you are using Win3.1 or WFWG you can install the Netware Client
  (VLMs) and some additional files which are provided with the TCP/IP
  diskette, namely
  TCPIP.exe, VTCPIP.386, WINSOCK.dll and WLIBSOCK.dll

  Note that the WINSOCK.dll file is different from the ones provided
  with Win95 and Trumpet. Install the Netware Client with the support
  for windows. Copy VTCPIP.386, WINSOCK.dll and WLIBSOCK.dll to the
  SYSTEM directory and TCPIP.exe to the NWCLIENT directory. Now modify
  the STARTNET.bat in the NWCLIENT directory to

          lsl
          ne2000     ---> your network card driver
          c:\windows\odihlp.exe     ---->if you are using WFWG
          ipxodi
          tcpip        ---> add this line
          vlm

  Create a subdirectory (say) \NET\TCP and copy the files HOSTS,
  NETWORKS, PROTOCOLS and SERVICES from /etc on your Linux server or the
  directory SYS:ETC on your Netware server. Edit the copied HOSTS file
  to add the line for your new Linux server. This will enable you to
  refer to the Linux server as http://linux.ppg_corp/ instead of
  http://200.0.0.1/in your WWW browser

          127.0.0.1      localhost
          200.0.0.1      linux.ppg_corp

  Edit the NET.cfg file in NWCLIENT directory

          Link Driver NE2000
              port 300
              int 3
              MEM D0000
              FRAME Ethernet_802.2

       ; ---- add these lines ----

             FRAME Ethernet_II

          Protocol TCPIP
             PATH TCP_CFG C:\NET\TCP
             ip_address  200.0.0.3
             ip_netmask  255.255.255.0

          Link Support
             MemPool 6192       ---> the minimum is 1024. Try with different values
             Buffers 10 1580    ---> this again can be fine tuned

       ;---------------------------------

  Edit the SYSTEM.ini file in the WINDOWS directory and add this entry
  for VTCPIP.386

     [386Enh]
     .....
     network=*vnetbios, vipx.386, vnetware.386, VTCPIP.386
     .....

  Reboot your PC, run STARTNET.bat and you can now use your favorite WWW
  browser to access your Web pages. You need not login to Netware and
  you don't have to run TCPMAN (if you use Trumpet Winsock).

  4.2.2.  Windows 95

  This section explains how to install the 32bit client on Win95.
  Firstly you must install the following

          Client for Netware Networks (from Microsoft or Novell)
          Microsoft TCP/IP Protocol
          Network Adapter

  To install these items, click on My Computer, Control Panel, Networks.
  Click Add. You will now be in a window that displays Client, Adapter,
  Protocol and Service.  To install the Client for Netware Networks:

         1. DoubleClick on Client
         2. Click on Microsoft or Novell
         3. DoubleClick on Client for Netware Networks

  To install the TCP/IP Protocol:

         1. DoubleClick on Protocol
         2. Click on Microsoft
         3. DoubleClick on TCP/IP

  Windows 95 by default installs several other protocols automatically.
  Remove them by clicking on them and clicking the Remove button.
  Typically Win95 installs the Microsoft NetBeui protocol, and IPX/SPX
  compatible protocol. You can delete the NetBEUI protocol, but you will
  need the IPX/SPX protocol if you wish to login to the Netware Server.
  Refer to the TCP/IP Setup FAQ for more details.

  To setup TCP/IP click on TCP/IP, click on Properties, click on the tab
  IP address

         Enter your IP address in the 'Specify an IP address '
                               box as 200.0.0.3
         In the Subnet Mask box enter 255.255.255.0
         Click OK

  You should get a message to reboot. Do so. You should now be able to
  use the Browser to connect to your HTTP Server.

  5.  Other Connections

  This is not the only way to connect to the Linux Server. You can try
  several other software like:

    SAMBA Web Page

    TCP/IP from Microsoft

    Trumpet TCP/IP packet driver

    CRYNWR Packet drivers

  You might also be interested in providing access to the Netware Server
  by loading the NCP driver for Linux

  6.  Applications of the WWW server

  The HTTP server can be used in the office to provide transparent
  access to information residing on different servers, at several
  locations and directories. The data can be simple documents in Word,
  Lotus spreadsheets, or complex databases. It can be used to create an
  interface with RDBMS like ORACLE and SYBASE for generating real-time
  information. Here is a list of database gateways to the WWW

  7.  Credits & Legalities

  Thanks to the people at NCSA for providing such excellent
  documentation & David Anderson for his comments and trying out this
  HOWTO!  I am told (by David) that you cannot use the Netware Client
  without having a Netware License.

