
                  THE LISC ONLINE LINUX SUPPORT MINI HOW-TO
                  -----------------------------------------

                 Or, "Friendly Help With Linux Questions" :)



This updated Mini-How-To briefly describes LISC, the Linux Internet Support
Cooperative.  We've changed our location yet again.  We are currently
available on our own little IRC network, currently comprising just one
server.  The server hostname is ``irc.linpeople.org''.  This will probably
be our final change for the forseeable future, at least until we replace IRC
with some other, more flexible conversation protocol.

Future editions will be posted on comp.os.linux.answers and in all of the
usual ftp locations.  For additional information, check with me via email,
``lilo <TaRDiS@Mail.UTexas.EDU>''.  But the best way to locate me is to find
me online.  ;)



1.    What is LISC?

LISC, the Linux Internet Support Cooperative, is an informal group which
provides friendly online support and problem assistance, for new and
experienced Linux users, using Internet Relay Chat (IRC).  We can be found
on the #LinPeople IRC channel, on server ``irc.linpeople.org''.


1.1.  Who runs LISC?

To the extent that anyone "runs" LISC, I guess that's me, lilo.  :)  I
coordinate the automation which maintains the #LinPeople channel's
facilities and irc.linpeople.org's server facilities.  Those facilities are
provided through the gracious assistance of several Internet system
administrators.


1.2.  Why LISC and #LinPeople?

LISC was started over a year ago, to fill a need which seems to go unmet
on the existing Linux IRC networks and channels.  It seems that channel
operators are often more interested in using their KICK and BAN privileges
than actually helping people (particularly newbies) with their Linux
problems.

#LinPeople is a relaxed environment where newbies, experienced users and
developers can all discuss topics relating to Linux.  We rarely have or need
human channel operators, and we will help whenever we can with your Linux
problems.

Many users, particularly those new to Unix-like systems, seem to respond
best to patient, interactive support.  So, while we consider it part of our
job to point out available documentation, such phrases as "Read the F***ing
Manual!" are not in our vocabulary. :)


1.3.    Do you need volunteers?

We welcome volunteers.  Since we're open 24 hours a day, 7 days a week,
including holidays, any time you are willing to contribute will be greatly
appreciated.  And, you'll have the satisfaction of knowing that you are
helping to expand the Linux user base, by reducing the frustration level of
people who are learning to use the system.  :)

Anyone who is interested in helping users with Linux-related problems, and
feels competent to do so, is welcome to try their hand, whenever they are
available.  We're not setting up fixed support schedules.  We ask only that
you treat our users with respect, and try not to respond to questions from
newbies if you're not in a patient mood.  :)


1.4.  Is LISC affiliated with LinuxNet?

No, we're not.  We are presently found exclusively on our own IRC server
net, a modified form of the Undernet/DALnet code.  This code has been
developed over the course of a few years and seems pretty reliable.  It
contains several features which contribute to the reliable maintenance of
our channel.  LinuxNet does not run servers with those features.


2.    How do I access #LinPeople?

To access #LinPeople, we recommend you use ircII.  There are other IRC
client programs available for WINDOWS, X, VMS and the various Internet-
connected systems, too diverse to describe in detail here, but ircII is the
canonical IRC client program.

For information on using ircII, check the /help command which comes with
ircII, as well as the documentation which comes with the client source code
on cs-ftp.bu.edu:/irc/clients.  Once you get onto our server, someone on
#LinPeople should be able to help answer your questions.  The next section
briefly describes how to start up ircII.

If you wish to install ircII on your own system, we recommend obtaining
version 2.6, along with its help files, from cs-ftp.bu.edu:/irc/clients.  Do
not fail to run the configuration script provided in the base source
directory, before attempting to 'make' the program.  It will save you lots
of grief.  :)

In addition, a series of script hacks to take advantage of certain server
features, such as longer nicknames, are available.  Check http://www.dal.net
for more details.


2.1.   Can you quickly describe how to start up ircII?

On most Unix_type systems, you'll use the command name 'ircII' or 'irc'. The
format is:

               <irc-command> <irc-nickname> irc.linpeople.org

For example, the following command might be used to enter an IRC session
using IRC nickname 'BigFred', on a system where the IRC command is 'ircII':

                  ircII BigFred irc.linpeople.org

We hope to see you soon, on #LinPeople!  :)


2.2.   When is #LinPeople available?

#LinPeople is open 24 hours, 7 days a week, including most holidays.  We
aren't staffed as well as we'd like at certain time periods (see
"Volunteers," above), but we'll try to help any time you have a question or
a problem.


2.3.   How do I ask questions?

When you enter the channel, first check to see if a conversation is going
on.  If so, describe your problem briefly and wait for a response.  Be
patient.  If you're a newbie, be aware that some answers will be long, and
listen patiently.  Ask questions about things you don't understand.  :)

If no one is talking when you enter the channel, jump right in.  But,
remember that even if there are people on the channel, they may not be awake
or at their terminals.  People often idle on IRC channels, so that people
can read their '/away' messages, or to await messages from specific users. 
If you don't get an immediate response, wait a few minutes and try again.

And, remember we're all volunteers; we have jobs and schoolwork when we're
not answering questions.  Don't beep--that disrupts the work environment and
people tend to be a little sensitive about it. When someone comes back from
idling, they'll usually send a public message to let you know.

We hope to see you soon, on #LinPeople! :)
 
(2.01 Tue May 7 17:41:58 UTC 1996)

